3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3. Try it again. 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3.
So you were ready to go back to graduate school? Is
that? After two years, in the meantime, I'd gotten
married. And that was part of my help in getting
through my master's. I had no financial
assistance. I'm a master's, but I thought the best
thing to do was to do it as quickly as possible full
time, then get back on the job. And we married in
1950, and this was the following year in 51. We
applied, or I would look very carefully at the
University of Missouri. There were only two or
three universities in the country that were
offering an extension education program.
Missouri was one of the first ones, and Michigan
was, Michigan State was one of the others. And I
guess I was leaning toward Missouri, but in the
meantime, my job, my wife got a firm teaching job
offer in East Lansing, Michigan, or close to East
Lansing, Michigan. And so we took off for Michigan
and did a master's there and finished in nine
months. Came back to Matagorda County as county
agent in June of that year. Describe the duties of
Matagorda County agent. Well, let me back up and
tell you one little anecdote about being in
Michigan. I got very close to the people up there.
In fact, my offices were right across the hall from
their field supervisor staff. And of course, I got
to know the professor, Dr. John Stone, who later
was director of extension in South Dakota. And
they from very early started talking about my
staying in Michigan and working with them and I had
no I was on leave from Texas A&M University but
leave without pay and I had felt an obligation of
coming back but I guess since they didn't offer me
any financial assistance that I might have
considered an offer but the anecdote was that one
one of the supervisors called me in one day and I
guess they weren't right sure they wanted a Texan
just yet. Maybe they could try me out on an interim
basis. But they had one of their larger counties up
in the Thumb area, Genesee County, as I recall, up
in the Thumb area of Michigan, had an agent that was
going to do two years of international
assignment. And they would employ me as an acting
agent until he got back. And by then, they'd have a
look at me, and I could have a look at them. I was, you
know, I didn't reject because I didn't have a firm
thing in Texas. The only thing they said, you know,
we'll do the best we can when you come back. We don't
know when the vacancies will be there because I was
not on leave from a position. I was on leave from the
organization. Anyway, this supervisor very
solemnly asked me if I drank on the job. No, not if I
drank on the job. He asked me if I drank. And I
thought, boy, this is a very dangerous question.
And I thought a little bit, and I said, no. Well, I
have taken a drink now and then, but never, ever,
ever on the job. And I don't think we could use you.
And I said, why? And he said, well, there's a lot of
German farmers up there, and when they have
extension meetings, they serve beer in the middle
of the day. If you don't partake, you're not
going to feed it. So not thinking was a
disadvantage. But I was very cautious in my
answer. Never, ever on the job. I said, well, I
probably can't use you. But anyway, we did have a
farm offer to go to Matagorda County of Bay City. We
grabbed it and went on down there. Matagorda
County was, of course, right next to Wharton
County. The agriculture was primarily rice, beef
cattle, and cotton, some grain sorghum. It was a
wonderful county to work in. It had one major
county seat town. A lot of times, if county agents
have a problem like we did in Wharton, you have two
smaller towns like Wharton, the county seat,
which is smaller than El Campo. And they're always
at each other's throats. do one thing in one part,
and you'd have to do the same thing in the other, and
so forth. In Matagorda, of course, they had
palaces, but palaces was much smaller. And it was a
wonderful experience. They had one of the best
churches there. A fellow named Donald was
minister in the Presbyterian church there. And we
participated very actively in the church there.
And we had a very modest, but good life down there.
People treated us very well. Now that was how far
from where you'd grown up? Well, it was on the
coast, Matagorda. No, and you grew up? I grew up in
Bexar County, close to San Antonio. Oh, yeah, so,
and the... As I said, I didn't know anything about
rice when I came into that area. And the population
make up, there were a good many Germans down there?
No, down in Matagorda County, there were a lot of
Czech people. A few Czech people, a few Germans,
but more Czech. In fact, the western part of the
county was heavily Czech. And it was also the
headquarters of Shanghai Pierce, if you
remember. He was a legend in that county. In the
family, there was a big pro football player named
Heffelfinger. You ever heard of him? Pudge
Heffelfinger. He was from that area. I think he
even had a little monument back there. But it was a
nice place. Did anybody give you any advice when
you first started out? Did anybody kind of pull you
aside and try to tell you what to do or not to do?
Well, you got a lot of that. from whom older agents
okay experienced agents and others that were you
know interested and you're getting off to a good
start but i guess one of the first things they
hammered into me i guess as a new county extension
agent you feel that you have to know the answer to
everything and i said you know learn very early
that if you don't know say you don't know but you'll
get the answer which we always could you know
because we had specialists backing us up and often
you can just pick up the telephone and get the
information they needed, but it's hard for a young
person right out of college to say, I don't know.
What kind of staffing did you have? Well, we had in
that county four agents.
I had two agricultural agents, I had an assistant
agent, and they had two women in home economics, an
agent and an assistant agent, and they also had two
black staff members. But they were, at that time,
housed separately from where we were housed. But
we worked together pretty closely. And as you
started off, what did you see as your primary
responsibilities? Well,
I tended to see my role as more of helping the
smaller farmers, because the rice farmers
generally at that time were a very
Very well off group. Those were in the 50s, and
there was a good world market for rice, and they
were big operators. I mean, they farm like 800,000
acres and run cattle with it, and many of them had
oil wells with it. And they didn't really need a lot
of help. We served the rice industry very well by
having once or twice a year what we called a rice
day. get all the specialists from Beaumont and
Texas A&M and had marketing discussed and all of
that. And 90% of the rice farmers would attend, and
that's about the main service. Occasionally
you've got some calls for that, but most of the
small farmers in the county were cotton farmers
and some grain sorghum. And I spent an awful lot of
time with them, organizing them, working with
them. A lot of it had to do with insect control in
cotton. Those were the days when the miracle
chemicals were coming out of World War II and DDT
and all of those things which are now discredited
were very much in vogue. I guess I saw myself on the
forefront of what happened in terms of the use of
pesticides. The marketers of agricultural
chemical companies were really marketing a lot of
stuff very aggressively. And with a lot of
farmers, it really was effective at first because
the insects weren't resistant and all of that. And
a lot of farmers thinking was that if a little bit is
good, it would be a whole lot better. And it wasn't
that expensive in those days. So they overused it a
lot. And we really got into some problems that were
early recognizable. There's no, as I've often
stated when I was down there, there's no plant more
attractive to insects than cotton. There are at
least 22 to 25 identifiable insects that thrive in
cotton. The boll weevil and the boll worm are the
two main ones. But we began to recognize early that
we're getting some problems in terms of control.
In fact, at that time, Texas A&M was advocating
what they called a preventive program. You did
early season spraying with with not even looking.
You just did it because then you'd get the plant off
to a good start and so forth, but then you should
stop and only treat later if needed. But what
happened in the program was that as they were using
these powerful hydrocarbon chemicals, when
they'd fight the boll weevil, say in the month of
June, they'd kill out everything. I mean, it was
sterile. I mean, there were no beneficial
insects. The boll worm, which is the same thing
that gets into your fear of corn that you tip in,
it's the same creature, they are very susceptible
to lacewing flies and to ladybugs and all of that,
because the female lays their eggs singly on top of
them, and 99% get eaten. And you'll have some, but
if you spray or dust, and in those days they used
airplanes a lot too, you just kill out everything,
and when these bull worms come in, And usually they
came from the corn crop because it matured at that
time. There was nothing there. And just
overnight, you could just be devastated. So we
recognized early on that beneficial insects
played a big role in this. And we just called
attention to that type of thing. And it's about
then that the entomologists began to identify
that that was indeed a problem. But I spent a lot of
time trying to educate farmers on how identify
their problems and as I often said I guess I talked
more people out of using chemicals than using them
because they always were ready to go you know they
wanted to save their crop and one of the with the
problem with the Gulf Coast was in in the
summertime you almost have a shower every day you
put out the chemicals get a little right rain and
all wash off and then you were unprotected again
you probably killed some good insects in the
meantime so you were really vulnerable and so we
began to learn that it was better in many, many
cases not to use the pesticides. Probably the
companies didn't like that. But I felt a very
strong role to work with the smaller farmers.
There were a lot of good family farms. We had 4-H
programs that involved the children, which the
assistant agent mostly worked with. It was a very
satisfying experience. Was there any kind of
advisor group? Yeah, we had a program building
committee where we had to leaders from every
community come together a couple of times a year
and try to identify what they considered were the
main problems of the county. And this would not
just relate to agriculture, but even community
problems. We helped organize communities.
Reagan Brown in those days had a program of
community organizations. And we'd encourage
communities to organize. And they had monthly
programs on various subjects. And it was a good
contact, good meeting place.
you know, a very satisfying operation. I guess I
was there about three and a half years, and when I
was invited to come to Texas A&M to an
administrative position after that, I guess the,
I almost changed my mind about coming. There was a
very, very limited income farmer who was really
struggling he had a large family i think he had
eight or nine kids he was on a farmer's home
administration loan he had very difficult times
making and i guess i worked a little harder with him
than i would have otherwise because he was
struggling so hard to make it but totally a type of
person who could not express his feelings
whatsoever but the day that my decision had been
announced to leave he came into my office with
tears in his eyes he said
And I said, I almost backed out. But anyway, I
stayed there, as I said, about three and a half
years, and then came up here in 1955, I guess. Down
there, were there many minority farmers, black or
Hispanic? Yes, there were, but we had a black
staff. They worked separately, but we worked
together. We had programs, joint programs. What
about Hispanic? Not too many at that time. There
were some, but they were mostly
in terms of migratory people coming through, and
now it's quite changed. There are many more
Hispanics there, I've noticed, than there were at
that time, but there were very few Hispanics that
were farm operators at that time. But there were
quite a few blacks who were farm operators,
particularly in the eastern side of the county.
Were there many sharecroppers, rent farmers?
There were a lot of rent farmers, yeah, not
sharecroppers. Most of the, most people, there
were a lot of rent people that for the sake of
someone who might not know the terminology of
farming, explain the difference between
sharecropping and rent farming. Well,
sharecropping, you actually give, physically
give a share of the crop to the, to the landowner. In
renting, you either, you pay a certain
percentage, at least call it thirds and fourths,
things like that, and it's not actual commodity,
it's the value. You produce ten bales of cotton,
you're farming on fourth seed, you know, a fourth
of that in cash, and you settled at the end of the
year. Which was better? Renting, yeah.
Sharecropping, I mean, it was, well, another
difference in sharecropping was the landowner
furnished everything, and in renting, you
furnished everything, and the landowner only
furnished the land, but still got a certain
percentage of the crop in terms of monetary Was
everybody then using mechanical equipment? Oh
yeah. No mules or horses? Maybe a few small, very
small farmers, but tractors were essentially
universally used, and as I said, in the rice
industry they were extremely mechanized. They
had these huge humongous tractors then, and they
did as many as three or four different operations
with airplanes. They seeded by airplane, they put
fertilizers out by airplane, they put out
insecticides, herbicides, desiccants, I mean,
except for plowing and combining the crop, most
everything was done by airplanes. And you
reported, in terms of the administrative
organizational chart, you reported to whom?
Well, there was an intermediate organization in
the Extension Service called a district, made up
of usually about 20 counties, and there was a
supervisor for agriculture and a supervisor for
home economics, and one that I reported to was
located in Richmond. They had an office there. My
supervisor was a fellow named Silver Whitsitt who
had been earlier a county agent in a neighboring
county where I grew up and had been one of my role
models. I always tracked my career, and he was the
one that offered me the first job when I got through
with my master's. How did you know What were the
measures of a successful county agent? How did you
know you were doing well? Well, I guess in those
days it was, I was one who always sought feedback.
How am I doing, you know, that type of thing. And Mr.
Whissett was a laid-back type of person. He said,
if you don't see me much, you're doing okay. He
said, I have to spend my time with the problem ones.
That was about the valuation feedback I got. Am I
correct, there were no quantitative
measurements that the crops increased or
decreased? Oh, you made reports. You had to make,
it wasn't required by Washington. You have to have
a report, and you must, you know, you were, but it
was very difficult to do because the crops are
dependent on weather and everything else, but it
was mostly based, what evaluations were done was
a, of organizations you had, the people you got
involved, and people who attended your meetings.
In fact, every meeting you had, you reported how
many people were there. I got very good at
estimating crowds. I could look at a large crowd
and say there were 632 there. How many, can you give
examples of any problems you encountered in that
three years? Well, it's a very interesting
assignment because you have to deal with all kinds
of problems. And I was, I remember when I was early
in the county, I had one of the very top leaders in
the county, you know, one of the movers and shakers
in the counties that you had to make sure that you
didn't cross, came into my office only about two or
three weeks after I was on the job, and really gave
me a dressing down. I mean, from up down to the other
end. I mean, he took it on himself to evaluate. And
the problem was, he couldn't find me in the
telephone book. Can you guess why? Because the
book hadn't been printed? He was looking in the
apps. Oh, oh, oh. He was very apologetic. The idea
of a county agent not having a phone. And they would
call you at five o'clock in the morning. They were
up and working. They figured the whole world was
up. And you might have come in at midnight from a
night meeting, because we had a lot of night
meetings. That's the only time farmers could come
in. But it was a job that know generally took 78
hours a week yeah just describe a typical week well
it's hard that's i think one of the things that made
the work interesting there were no two days alike i
mean you uh you responded to requests uh we tried to
i mean you did individual work but obviously when
you have several thousand farmers in the county
you can't visit everyone personally and we kept
trying to use group methods you know if we if we did
some insect work we'd ask the farmer to invite his
neighbors in and you know we'd discuss problems
and we'd have demonstrations on some places where
we'd invite other farmers in we'd have meetings
throughout you know throughout the county at
nights and weekends and all of that we used the
radio we had a weekly news column every which way to
get the information out to as many people as
possible and you know try to get the information
you know try to be proactive try to get you know if
it's spring you anticipated certain problems and
And with a small county, you know, you have easy
access to the radio, the newspaper, and all of
that, because they're looking to fill public
service time and have a weekly column in the paper,
that type of thing. And how many hours were you in
the office? Well, it got to, you know, people also
complained if they could, if you weren't in the
office, they'd say, well, that's all he does, he
sits in his office, and there were agents that had
that reputation, and others were never in the
office. So I got to the habit of just setting a day
that I would be in the office. I always was in the
office, say, on Monday. Then I also set up because
Palacios was so far away, and they always felt
alienated. I worked a half a day there on
Wednesdays. And I was a member of Rotary, and I made
it nice that the Rotary Club met on Wednesdays
there. And they helped me find a little place, and
people wanted to catch me then in the county. It was
part of the city hall. They'd take calls and
requests when I'd come there. There were people
that wanted to talk to me and so forth and, you know,
kept publications there and so forth. But the
whole effort was trying to, you know, get out
information that was useful and helpful to
farmers. And I think in those days, Extension made
a big impact because the farmers were kept, you
know, up to date on what varieties to plant, what,
you know, how to deal with insect problems and all
of this. Did you have to cope with any natural
disasters? No hurricanes, no floods? Well, not
there. Luckily, when I was there, there
were no major hurricanes, but when I went to work in
Wharton as assistant I reported the Monday after
one of the worst hurricanes I ever had, and I
remember going to the Danabank community, which
was a Danish community on the line between
Matagorda and Wharton County, that cotton bales,
as you know, they weigh 500 pounds, they floated
away from the cotton gin, and they were out in the
fields, and they must have had 20 inches of rain
after the storm came in, and You know, if you've
ever smelled a pig pen, the whole country smelled
that way because it had been underwater so long and
everything rotted. It was a disaster. And we had to
do a lot of work with trying to get, helping people
get back on their feet and all of that. But that was
the only major disaster I
experienced. I had one other interesting
experience. One of the rice cattle farmers there
very active in our program, one of the leaders, and
they operated cattle on the coastal marsh areas,
and they would, in the wintertime, they put the
cattle out on the barrier islands and peninsulas,
on the salt grass areas, because there was a lot of
forage there, and that's the only time a year to do
it, because otherwise the mosquitoes were so bad,
it was impossible to keep So they had, this
particular operation had the entire southern
part of Matagorda Peninsula. And they kept their
cattle out there in the winter, and then you had
this huge roundup. And he was always after me to
join them in their roundups. And I said, I can't
justify doing this. I have plenty of taste. But he
just insisted that I do it. And it was a good
experience, because it was really a throwback to
the 1880s in Texas, because They started out at the
mouth of the Colorado with their chuck wagon, with
a black cook. They had about 20 or 30 horses with a
lot of cowboys. They swam all of this across the
mouth of the river. That's the only way you could
access it. And the idea was they'd go about 20 or 30
miles down to the end of the peninsula, and then
round up the cattle and come back and swim them back
across the river. Because when the spring came,
they had to get them into interior lands. I hadn't
ridden a horse in a long time, and he and I rode down
there, and I suspect we must have ridden 150 miles
that day, because not only, the truck wagon was
right on the beach where the surf had made a hard
surface, but he kept crisscrossing, checking
windmills, checking salt blocks, and all of this,
and I would have died if I had stayed there another
day. It was wonderful eating there under the stars
and everything, but He had arranged for a plane to
pick me up the next morning, and I was so sore I could
barely walk for a week. And if I had, as I said, if I
had a way to ride another day, I'm sure I would have
been absolutely incapacitated. Right. That was
almost a half century ago. How has the farm
economy, the agriculture economy of that county
changed in these 50 years? Well, I'm not, I haven't
been back there very often, but I can observe
because a lot of times we, uh, host international
visitors there and visit counties and so forth.
The reality of farming nowadays is that there are
very few bona fide farmers left as such. I remember
we had a Chinese delegation here a few years ago,
about 15 people, and we took them to a neighboring
county, and they were very much interested in this
particular question, and even though this was
considered a top agricultural county, one of them
asked them the question of how many farmers do you
really have that depend you know basically on on
farming for their life and he was kind of pressed
against the wall and he said he'd have a hard time
naming a dozen that would fit that category you
know full-time farming farm nearly everyone
nowadays it has off the farm employment or their
wife works off the farm they've got to have some way
of having a regular income because you have all
kinds of monthly things to take care of. And many
farmers do work off the farm now. And of course,
there are many. And there's the other kind of
people who have the attachment to the land who,
once they get some resources, will buy a little
place. So they cause a lot of activity for the
agents because many of them are unknowledgeable
about agriculture when they buy a place and they
want to raise a few cattle and horses and things
like that. Have the crops changed down there? Not
too much. There's been a great big increase in
Texas of corn production. I can remember growing
up, when we used to grow corn, we'd make 15, 20
bushels. We thought we made a reasonable crop.
They regularly produce in Texas the same kind of
yields now they do in the corn belt, like 100
bushels, over 100 bushels an acre, with modern
varieties, fertilizers, this type of thing,
early maturing varieties. So there's lots of corn
grown in Texas, a lot of grain sorghum. Rice
continues. They've had their difficulties.
Cotton has gone out in many areas, particularly in
the eastern part of the states, only in the bottom
lands, like here in Brazos County.
drive over to Austin, there are a few little spots
of cotton left that I know like in the community I
grew up in, we had three cotton gins when I was
growing up, working 24 hours a day from August
through December. All gone. People that try to
grow cotton have to go miles and miles to get their
cotton gins. Right. That's, in my case, in
Garland, Dallas suburb. Exactly the same. There
were three gins. My grandparents thought that the
co-op gin was communistic. And they, there were
two private owned and then one co-op. And I don't
know where the nearest gin is now. Well, that's
what, there was a little revival of interest in
some of those areas recently, but I heard some
farmers had to go like over a hundred miles to, over
a hundred miles to get a gin. So you, how did you get
the, how did the contact come about coming back,
back here to come back to the campus? I always had, I
guess it was related to my thesis work that I did for
my master's. I had to write a thesis in Michigan.
And they wanted somebody to give some in-depth
study to the problem of staffing counties. How
many counties do you need in this county, and so
forth. And I developed a procedure working up
there of how to, what we called, measure the
extension workload of trying to justify whether
it was six-agent county or whatever it was. I did
that. In fact, it got known, and I've heard run into
Michigan staffers many years later that still
referred to the Foxfield formula. Anyway, that
came to the attention of the administrators here,
and they were concerned with the same problem, but
they were also concerned with another problem of
financing. Everything up to then, the
legislation authorizing extension work in Texas
counties was permissive. They just said the
extension service could enter into agreements
with the local county commissioners' court as to
staffing and payment and so forth. And everything
was pretty informal and not structured in any
which way. I mean, if a county was willing to pay for
extra agents, they wanted four. Whether or not you
could justify it or not, they'd get four. If they
wanted six, they'd get six, that type of thing. And
about that time, I don't know if you remember,
there was a lot of restructuring of the school's
financing system in Texas, the Gilmer-Akin bill,
where the concept was developed that the poor,
so-called poor counties, that means according to
tax base, would get more state support than richer
counties. I mean, it was trying to equalize the big
oil counties and so forth. And this was of interest
to the administration here that they felt they had
to have a more rational way of
measuring workload, too, but tying this also to
how much a county should be expected to
contribute. It varied all the way from 20% to 80%. I
mean, in, say, a so-called rich county, a county
that had a high tax base, if they insisted on extra
agents, and the extension service felt
stretching it a little, they might only
participate a little bit, but the county would pay
everything, or that part of that. But you got,
started getting, the county judges started
comparing things, you know, I've got as much as
you've got, how come you've got this, and so they
wanted some kind of a formalized structure, and I
was brought in as an